---
imagePath: "/blog_images/blog_3/main.jpg"
imageName: "Blog 3 - Love"
title: "Love at First Sight: A Destiny or Illusion?"
date: "Nov 06, 2025"
excerpt: "What is the underlying structure of this love at first sight? The nature of love? Desire and human connection?"
tags: ["Philosophy"]
---
[This blog is adapted from a reflective essay I submitted for my philosophy course PHIL3652 (fall 24-25) at CUHK]

Love, commonly depicted as a pink heart floating in the air, always reminds me of the famous figure of God of desire – Cupid. In classical mythology, he was portrayed as a winged cubby boy. According to legend, his arrows can even make two strangers fall in love immediately and uncontrollably. Certainly, such figure and his weapon are only a myth and hardly exist in the history. Yet, the experience of love at first sight is very real, recording in multiple opera and literature. Most importantly, it exhibits an intense feeling, temporal and fragile nature that regular love lacks. In this short paper, I wish to explore the underlying structure of this phenomenon, revealing the nature of love, desire and human connection.


The study of human desire stems from the very experience of it. When I was younger, I believed that love without any foundation is unreliable, thus the idea of love at first sight is artificial and absurd. Not until I met my partner, that I experienced a sensation that was both surreal and electrifying. In this very moment, my world is a nothingness, leaving only me and her, and she becomes truly unique to you.

My very first attempt is the visually and biologically appealing appearance of the others. If a person finds another physically attractive, they may will feel a desire to possess that body and interpret such desire as love. However, it is clear that humans not only value appearance, but more importantly the soul of the others. The lovers should sense the beloved as unique, yet appearance fails to account to this uniqueness. Therefore, there must be something transcendental, unobservable on top of the beloved, in which the lovers identify instantly.


Perhaps, love at first sight is destined and deterministic. In Symposium, Aristophanes made a speech to the origin of the humans, where he concludes that love is the desire to reunite with another to return to an original state. Although it seems mysterious, it aligns well with our phenomenon. Because they originated from the same body, they feel a strong impulse to reunite upon seeing one another. Love at first sight is, therefore, nothing but a natural response to reconnect the bodies. The problem is: is desire merely a lack of something as Socrates discussed with Diotima? It is certain that a person could experience love at first sight twice or more in his life. However, a person could only share the body with one another, meaning that he must also experience once only with his other half. Indeed, one could later discover such a feeling is irrational and ingenuine. Love at first sight is often temporary and fragile, and one may come to realize what they felt was not love, but rather a projection of their own desires and fantasies. Therefore, desire is not a lack of something, otherwise one would have been satisfied with one and only one partner.


If love at first sight is not unique but related to one body, what could it be? To understand this, we must examine the standards an individual is pursuing. Every person is a single consciousness in this world, and the others is always out of reach for them. The others are mystery, and they are often not fully known. The individual is present alone in their self-contained world, which one could only interact with themselves fully. Therefore, the ideal figure for one is themselves, and they are constantly seeking a similar soul. Upon seeing it, the individual feels a desire to connect with others, moving towards the same ends. Kojeve noted that the history of human beings is the grand story of desire conquering, subjugating another desire. Indeed, if a man acts so much just to possess a recognition from another body, a similar soul is the best answer, as no one will ever reject its own existence. Although one could not comprehend the transcendental nature of others, they still sense the possibility of connection. It is precisely this possibility that makes love at first sight so powerful. If a hope does not exist at all, why would one waste time on it? On the other hand, if the connection is certain and foreseeable, then love is merely an uninteresting and predictable path to that end.


Love at first sight appears fundamentally more fragile and irrational when compared to regular love. By regular love, I conceive it as a gradual, procedural discovery of the goodness in the others. The reason lies in the ambiguity of the other’s existence. Because the nature of ‘I’ is transcendental, the existence of the beloved one will never be captured by the lovers. Love at first sight is formed only by a projection of an idealized self-image, shaped by the lovers themselves. Soon the lovers will come to understand what they love will never match their ideals, but a fleeting illusion. Once the subjectivity of the others is revealed, the ideal of similarity will break down immediately, as no one shares the same properties nor existence. In contrast, regular love undergoes a more complex negotiation between individuals as beings-for-itself and beings-for-others. In Sartre’s words, it is an attempt to possess each other as an object, while maintaining the autonomy and freedom of oneself. Although its nature is conflicting, it is rooted in the mutual acceptance of subjectivity, making it romantic in a deeper way. With enough consciousness, lovers could strike the balance between selfness and in-itself, realizing and recognizing the superiority and freedom of the beloved one. Regular love, if successful, is thus more endurable after accepting the limits of oneself.


To summarize, one experiences love at first sight is not because of physical attraction, nor fulfillment of a lack of something. Instead, it is a project of finding and satisfying the idealized self-image. The intensity and temporality of such love often fascinates us. Through this process, we not only explore the transcendental existence of the others, but also embark a journey of self-discovery, signalizing our own immanent nature.